---
title: OpenAFS Meeting Summary - November 13, 2007
---

**Attendees**:  Russ Allbery, Jeffrey Altman, Derrick Brashear, Todd
DeSantis, Laura Stentz, Warren Yenson. \

**Gatekeeper Reports** - Russ Allbery, Jeffrey Altman, and Derrick
Brashear sent out gatekeeper reports to the Council of Elders on
11/13/07, in advance of the meeting.  A summary of their reports appears
below: \

Derrick Brashear (UNIX Development) \

-   OpenAFS 1.4.5 was released and includes support for Leopard, Solaris
    10-update 4, and new Linux support.
-   Bug fixes proposed for 1.4.6 include verifying
    viced-accurately-track-file-callbacks-20071112 fixes the bug seen
    with CBFree/FEFree corruption, viced-missing-lock-20071109,
    libafsrpc-makefile-fix-20071110 for RPMS,
    linux-nsec-timestamp-zero-20071106, linux-splice-support-2007-1106
    and solaris-nevada-update-2007-1101,
    linux-afs-unlinked-file-dentry-flagging-20071031, and various Mac
    and RPM packaging files.
-   Pending work includes module unload cleanup, afs\_HashOutDCache
    panic, and an Rx error. 
-   Longer term, there is work planned to stabilize 1.5 so that we are
    able to put out 1.6 series releases.  There has also been discussion
    with the HEPiX community regarding a timeout issue which limits AFS
    throughput.  Derrick is working with Rainer Toebbicke regarding his
    Rx test tool to resolve this matter.  He is also working with
    Hartmut Reuter to integrate his AFS+Object Storage code.  However,
    the timing of this work depends on the availability of resources.

 \

Jeffrey Altman (Windows Development) \

There have been three OpenAFS for Windows releases since the last Elders
meeting:  OpenAFS 1.5.25 (9/20/07), 1.5.26 (10/23/07), and 1.5.27
(11/7/07).  Details of these releases can be found at
[openafs.org](http://openafs.org).  \

The following changes have been made post 1.5.27:

-   Optimization of the performance of the Windows cache manager.
-   A new option which permits .readonly callbacks to be automatically
    renewed prior to expiration.  This option can reduce load on
    .readonly volumes over long periods of time. However, it is an
    optional feature since it will result in a single FetchStatus
    request being sent per .readonly volume whether or not the client is
    actively using that volume.

 \

Future work plans for OpenAFS Windows Development include:

-   OpenAFS Redirector work (in progress)
-   OpenAFS File System Filter Driver that will permit \\\\AFS to be
    used without requiring the presence of the Microsoft Loopback
    Adapter.
-   Implementation of Extended Attributes by storing data in the Apple
    Double Files as described in RFC 1740.

 \

Russ Allbery (Debian & Documentation) \

-   1.4.5 packages have been uploaded to Debian. 
-   The 1.4 backport of the Kerberos multiple-realm patch will be pulled
    into the Debian packages so that it can be more broadly tested.
-   There will be additional work to improve Documentation, including
    Russ committing pending contributions from Jason Edgecombe. 
-   Stanford and Sine Nomine are pursuing a file server problem that's
    causing periodic segfaults due to an apparent free list corruption. 
    Once this bug is identified and fixed, it should be included in a
    1.4.6 release.
-   Russ is going to try to get some resources at Stanford to start
    testing the demand-attach fileserver.

 \

**Council of Elders - Member Resignation** \

Warren Yenson has resigned from the OpenAFS Council of Elders since he
is no longer actively involved in OpenAFS development or with OpenAFS
customers.   Warren had been closely involved with OpenAFS in his
position at Morgan Stanley, but he has not been involved with AFS in his
position at Google.   However, Warren has kindly offered to talk with
the Google Android team members about possible opportunities with
OpenAFS.   The Council of Elders would like to thank Warren for his
contributions to OpenAFS and wish him well in the future.  

**AFS & Kerberos Best Practice Workshop** \

The 2008 Workshop will be held at NJIT in Newark, NJ, the week of May
19-23, 2008.   There is a block of rooms available at Newark Penn
Station Hilton.  Registration information will be available on the
[http://workshop.openafs.org/afsbpw08/](http://workshop.openafs.org/afsbpw08/)
website once additional details have been sorted out. \

**OpenAFS Newsletter** \

Laura will summarize this Council meeting and edit the November OpenAFS
Newsletter.  Todd will summarize the top 5 openafs info e-mail threads
for the newsletter (some possible topics of interest include:  win 2003
thread, how to integrate cvs differently cvs api with afs tokens, new
linux kernels supported, use of ufs logging on solaris, klog
integration).  Russ will summarize the status of OpenAFS documentation
for the November Newsletter. \

**Next Meeting** \

December 11, 2007 - 1:00 Eastern Time \

