---
title: Articles of Incorporation
---

###### Text for the Certificate of Incorporation form [(PDF)](http://www.oag.state.ny.us/charities/how_to_incorporate.pdf).

CERTIFICATE OF INCORPORATION OF
-------------------------------

OpenAFS Foundation \
 Under Section 402 of the Not-for-Profit Corporation Law

The undersigned, a natural person of the age of eighteen years or over
acting as the incorporator of a corporation pursuant to the New York
Not-for-Profit Corporation Law, hereby adopts the following certificate
for this corporation:

**FIRST:** The name of the corporation is the OpenAFS Foundation (the
"Corporation").

**SECOND:** The Corporation is a corporation as defined in subparagraph
(a)(5) of Section 102 of the Not-for-Profit Corporation Law.

**THIRD:** The Corporation is a Type B corporation as defined in Section
201 of the Not-for-Profit Corporation Law.

**FOURTH:** The purposes for which the Corporation is formed are: \
 This Corporation is a nonprofit membership corporation, organized and
operated exclusively for scientific, educational, and charitable
purposes as defined by Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of
1986, as amended (the "Code"), including, but not limited to:

1.  protecting the intellectual property consisting of the interfaces,
    tools, libraries, and implementations collectively known as
    "OpenAFS";
2.  cultivating an open source community and an ecosystem of
    complementary tools, libraries, extensions, applications, and
    implementations;
3.  offering OpenAFS and associated technologies to members of the
    general public through the use of open source licensing;
4.  educating members of the general public in the application of
    OpenAFS and associated technologies;
5.  advancing OpenAFS and associated technologies through scientific
    research and development; and
6.  aiding, supporting, and assisting by gifts, grants, contributions,
    or otherwise, other persons or organizations of any kind, provided
    that such activities are consistent with the foregoing purposes.

The Corporation shall have all powers now or hereafter granted by law,
and all powers lawfully necessary or required to carry out its purposes,
either alone or in cooperation with others, subject to such limitations
and conditions as are or may be prescribed by law, or in the
Corporation's Articles of Incorporation or Bylaws.

**FIFTH:** Notwithstanding any other provision of this certificate of
incorporation, the Corporation is organized exclusively for one or more
of the purposes specified in Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue
Code of 1986, as amended, or corresponding provisions of any subsequent
federal tax laws (the "Internal Revenue Code") and shall not carry on
any other activities not permitted to be carried on by (a) a corporation
exempt from federal income tax under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal
Revenue Code or (b) by a corporation, contributions to which are
deductible under section 170(c)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code.

**SIXTH:** No part of the net earnings of the Corporation shall inure to
the benefit of, or be distributable to, any member, trustee, director or
officer of the Corporation or any other private person or entity, except
that the Corporation shall be authorized to pay reasonable compensation
for services rendered and to make payments and distribution in
furtherance of its purposes as set forth in this certificate of
incorporation.

**SEVENTH:** No substantial part of the activities of the Corporation
shall be the carrying on of propaganda, or otherwise attempting to
influence legislation (except as otherwise provided by Internal Revenue
Code Section 501(h)), and the Corporation shall not participate or
intervene in (including the publication or distributions of statements)
any political campaign on behalf of or in opposition to any candidate
for public office.

**EIGHTH:** In the event of dissolution, all of the remaining assets and
property of the Corporation shall after payment of necessary expenses
and satisfaction of all liabilities thereof be distributed upon approval
of a Justice of the Supreme Court of the State of New York to another
organization exempt under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code
or to the Federal government, or state or local government for a public
purpose.

**NINTH:** In any taxable year in which the Corporation is a private
foundation as described in Section 509(a) of the Internal Revenue Code,
the Corporation shall distribute its income for said period at such time
and in such manner as not to subject it to tax under Section 4942 of the
Internal Revenue Code; and the Corporation shall not (a) engage in any
act of self-dealing as defined in Section 4941(d) of the Internal
Revenue Code, (b) retain any excess business holdings as defined in
Section 4943(c) of the Internal Revenue Code, (c) make any investments
in such manner as to subject the corporation to tax under Section 4944
of the Internal Revenue Code, or (d) make any taxable expenditures as
defined in Section 4945(d) of the Internal Revenue Code.

**TENTH:** The office of the Corporation is to be located in the County
of \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, State of New York.

**ELEVENTH:** The Corporation shall be operated by a board of directors,
the number of which is to be no less than three.

**TWELFTH:** The names and post office addresses of the initial
directors of the Corporation are as follows: \

### NAMES AND ADDRESSES OF EACH INITIAL BOARD DIRECTOR:

Joe Blow; 123 Random St; New York, NY 10013\
 Joe Blow; 123 Random St; New York, NY 10013\
 Joe Blow; 123 Random St; New York, NY 10013\

**THIRTEENTH:** The Secretary of State is hereby designated as agent of
the Corporation upon whom process against the Corporation may be served.
The post office address to which the Secretary shall mail a copy of any
process against the Corporation served upon the Secretary is:
(addressee's name, address, zip code).

Joe Blow\
 123 Random St\
 New York, NY, 10013\

*Name of Incorporator* \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\
 *Signature of Incorporator* \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\
 *Address of Incorporator* \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\
 *Date* \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\

